1. Fibromyalgia.

Kaltsas G(1), Tsiveriotis K(2).

In: Feingold KR(3), Anawalt B(4), Blackman MR(5), Boyce A(6), Chrousos G(7), 
Corpas E(8), de Herder WW(9), Dhatariya K(10), Dungan K(11), Hofland J(12), 
Kalra S(13), Kaltsas G(14), Kapoor N(15), Koch C(16), Kopp P(17), Korbonits 
M(18), Kovacs CS(19), Kuohung W(20), Laferrère B(21), Levy M(22), McGee EA(23), 
McLachlan R(24), New M(25), Purnell J(26), Sahay R(27), Shah AS(28), Singer 
F(29), Sperling MA(30), Stratakis CA(31), Trence DL(32), Wilson DP(33), editors. 
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000–.
2023 Nov 9.

Author information:
(1)Professor of Medicine, Department of Pathophysiology, Laikon University 
Hospital, Athens 115 27, Greece
(2)Consultant in Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Maternal and Fetal Medicine, Greece
(3)Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San Francisco, CA
(4)Chief of Medicine at the University of Washington Medical Center and 
Professor and Vice Chair of the Department of Medicine, University of Washington
(5)Sr. Physician Scientist, Washington DC VA Medical Center; Professor of 
Medicine & Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University; Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University; and 
Professor of Medicine (Part-time), Johns Hopkins University
(6)Pediatric Endocrinologist and Associate Research Physician in the Skeletal 
Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health
(7)Professor of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism and Diabetes, First Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece
(8)M.D. Ph.D in Gerontology. Honorary Professor of Medicine, Universidad de 
Alcalá, Madrid. Consultant in Endocrinology, Hospital HLA Guadalajara (Spain).
(9)Professor of Endocrine Oncology, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(10)Consultant in Diabetes, Endocrinology and General Medicine, Norfolk and 
Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK.
(11)Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 
Ohio State University
(12)Consultant Endocrinologist, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(13)Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, 
Karnal, India
(14)Professor of General Medicine-Endocrinology, 1st Department of Propaedeutic 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
(15)Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(16)Professor, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 
Tennessee
(17)Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetology and Metabolism, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
(18)Professor of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Centre Lead for Endocrinology and 
Deputy Institute Director, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, England
(19)University Research Professor and Professor of Medicine (Endocrinology and 
Metabolism), Obstetrics & Gynecology, and BioMedical Sciences, at Memorial 
University of Newfoundland in St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada.
(20)Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology at Boston Medical 
Center and an Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Boston 
University School of Medicine
(21)Professor of Medicine, New York Nutrition Obesity Research Center, Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(22)Consultant endocrinologist at University Hospitals of Leicester and Honorary 
Associate Professor at Leicester University
(23)Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Vermont and 
Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 
Burlington, Vermont
(24)Director of Clinical Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia
(25)Professor of Pediatrics, Professor of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, and 
Chief of the Adrenal Steroid Disorders Program, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
(26)Professor of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and the Division of 
Endocrinology, and Associate Director, Bob and Charlee Moore Institute for 
Nutrition and Wellness, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
(27)Professor and Head of Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College 
and Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(28)Professor of Pediatrics, The University of Cincinnati, Department of 
Pediatrics and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Endocrinology, Cincinnati, OH, USA
(29)Director of the Endocrine/Bone Disease Program, Saint Johns Cancer Institute 
at Saint John’s Health Center, Santa Monica, CA; Clinical Professor of Medicine, 
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
(30)Professorial Lecturer, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Emeritus Professor and 
Chair, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh.
(31)CSO, ELPEN, Inc. & Director, Research Institute, Athens, Greece & Senior 
Investigator, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, FORTH (ITE), Heraklion, 
Greece. Emeritus Scientific Director & Senior Investigator, NICHD, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
(32)Professor of Medicine, Emeritus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
(33)Endowed Chair, Cardiovascular Health and Risk Prevention, Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX

Fibromyalgia is a clinical entity characterized by the combination of chronic 
widespread pain and other non-pain symptoms, including fatigue, poor sleep, and 
cognitive disturbances, which can exhibit symptom variation not only between 
different patients, but also in the same patient during the course of the 
disease. These symptoms are relatively common and non-specific. They can be 
encountered in other disorders that may overlap with fibromyalgia, often without 
having clear boundaries, while their nature makes them difficult to be 
objectively defined and quantified. These issues have led to significant 
controversy over the definition and the diagnostic criteria of fibromyalgia. It 
has been suggested that the markers of physical and psychological distress have 
a continuous distribution in the general population with fibromyalgia patients 
being at the extreme end of this continuum. Genetic predisposition in 
combination with environmental factors, are responsible for each individual’s 
position in this this distribution. In recent years more knowledge has been 
obtained to better understand the environmental factors that seem to be 
important in triggering fibromyalgia. Most of them act as stressors superimposed 
onto a deranged stress-response system leading to dys-regulation of the 
nociceptive system and the appearance of clinical symptoms. The aim of the 
therapy is to relieve pain and motivate the patients to become more physically 
active using a multimodal individualized therapeutic strategy that includes 
education, exercise, cognitive-behavioral approaches and medications. The 
response to current therapeutic modalities varies significantly, with some 
patients responding adequately, while others do not seem to experience any 
long-term benefit. For complete coverage of all related areas of Endocrinology, 
please visit our on-line FREE web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

Copyright © 2000-2023, MDText.com, Inc.

PMID: 25905317
