1. Effect of Pregnancy on Lipid Metabolism and Lipoprotein Levels.

Wild R(1), Feingold KR(2).

In: Feingold KR(3), Anawalt B(4), Blackman MR(5), Boyce A(6), Chrousos G(7), 
Corpas E(8), de Herder WW(9), Dhatariya K(10), Dungan K(11), Hofland J(12), 
Kalra S(13), Kaltsas G(14), Kapoor N(15), Koch C(16), Kopp P(17), Korbonits 
M(18), Kovacs CS(19), Kuohung W(20), Laferrère B(21), Levy M(22), McGee EA(23), 
McLachlan R(24), New M(25), Purnell J(26), Sahay R(27), Shah AS(28), Singer 
F(29), Sperling MA(30), Stratakis CA(31), Trence DL(32), Wilson DP(33), editors. 
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000–.
2023 Mar 3.

Author information:
(1)Presidential Professor and Vice Chair R&D, Gynecology Reproductive 
Endocrinology, Biostatistics Clinical Epidemiology, Oklahoma University Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104
(2)Emeritus Professor of Medicine, University of California- San Francisco
(3)Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San Francisco, CA
(4)Chief of Medicine at the University of Washington Medical Center and 
Professor and Vice Chair of the Department of Medicine, University of Washington
(5)Sr. Physician Scientist, Washington DC VA Medical Center; Professor of 
Medicine & Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University; Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University; and 
Professor of Medicine (Part-time), Johns Hopkins University
(6)Pediatric Endocrinologist and Associate Research Physician in the Skeletal 
Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health
(7)Professor of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism and Diabetes, First Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece
(8)M.D. Ph.D in Gerontology. Honorary Professor of Medicine, Universidad de 
Alcalá, Madrid. Consultant in Endocrinology, Hospital HLA Guadalajara (Spain).
(9)Professor of Endocrine Oncology, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(10)Consultant in Diabetes, Endocrinology and General Medicine, Norfolk and 
Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK.
(11)Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 
Ohio State University
(12)Consultant Endocrinologist, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(13)Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, 
Karnal, India
(14)Professor of General Medicine-Endocrinology, 1st Department of Propaedeutic 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
(15)Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(16)Professor, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 
Tennessee
(17)Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetology and Metabolism, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
(18)Professor of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Centre Lead for Endocrinology and 
Deputy Institute Director, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, England
(19)University Research Professor and Professor of Medicine (Endocrinology and 
Metabolism), Obstetrics & Gynecology, and BioMedical Sciences, at Memorial 
University of Newfoundland in St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada.
(20)Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology at Boston Medical 
Center and an Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Boston 
University School of Medicine
(21)Professor of Medicine, New York Nutrition Obesity Research Center, Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(22)Consultant endocrinologist at University Hospitals of Leicester and Honorary 
Associate Professor at Leicester University
(23)Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Vermont and 
Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 
Burlington, Vermont
(24)Director of Clinical Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia
(25)Professor of Pediatrics, Professor of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, and 
Chief of the Adrenal Steroid Disorders Program, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
(26)Professor of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and the Division of 
Endocrinology, and Associate Director, Bob and Charlee Moore Institute for 
Nutrition and Wellness, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
(27)Professor and Head of Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College 
and Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(28)Professor of Pediatrics, The University of Cincinnati, Department of 
Pediatrics and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Endocrinology, Cincinnati, OH, USA
(29)Director of the Endocrine/Bone Disease Program, Saint Johns Cancer Institute 
at Saint John’s Health Center, Santa Monica, CA; Clinical Professor of Medicine, 
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
(30)Professorial Lecturer, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Emeritus Professor and 
Chair, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh.
(31)CSO, ELPEN, Inc. & Director, Research Institute, Athens, Greece & Senior 
Investigator, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, FORTH (ITE), Heraklion, 
Greece. Emeritus Scientific Director & Senior Investigator, NICHD, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
(32)Professor of Medicine, Emeritus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
(33)Endowed Chair, Cardiovascular Health and Risk Prevention, Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX

Lipoprotein lipid physiology in pregnancy has important implications for the 
developing fetus and newborn as well as the mother. Cholesterol and essential 
fatty acids are essential for normal fetal development. In pregnancy, multiple 
physiological changes occur that contribute to the alterations in lipid profiles 
of healthy, gestating women. Initially, there is an anabolic phase with an 
increase in lipid synthesis and fat storage in preparation for the increases in 
fetal energy needs in late pregnancy. During the third trimester, lipid 
physiology transitions to a net catabolic phase with a breakdown of fat 
deposits. The catabolism increases substrates for the growing fetus. Overall, 
the changes in lipid physiology throughout the course of pregnancy allow for 
proper nutrients for the fetus and they reflect increasing insulin resistance in 
the mother. In a normal pregnancy, total cholesterol levels increase by 
approximately 50%, LDL-C by 30-40%, HDL-C by 25%, and triglycerides by 2- to 
3-fold. Our understanding and appreciation of the full scope and implications of 
dyslipidemia in pregnancy on both maternal and fetal outcomes is not complete; 
however, it is well known that dyslipidemia in pregnancy is associated with 
adverse pregnancy outcomes affecting both maternal and fetal health. There are 
direct implications of dyslipidemia on perinatal outcomes as well as intricate 
relationships between dyslipidemia and other comorbid intrauterine conditions. 
There is also developing research indicating that the in-utero environment 
influences susceptibility to chronic diseases later in life, a concept known as 
“developmental programming.” Given all of these implications of dyslipidemia in 
pregnancy on maternal and fetal health, it is prudent to screen women for lipid 
disorders. The ideal time for this is before conception; if a woman has not been 
screening before pregnancy, the initial obstetrical visit is ideal. Abnormal 
lipids should be followed through pregnancy. The treatment of dyslipidemia in 
pregnancy is multifactorial, including diet, exercise, and weight management. 
Medical management is complicated by FDA classifications for medication risks to 
the fetus, however some evidence indicates there may be permissible 
pharmacological treatments for dyslipidemia in pregnancy. In certain instances, 
plasmapheresis or lipoprotein apheresis can be employed. For complete coverage 
of all related areas of Endocrinology, please visit our on-line FREE web-text, 
WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

Copyright © 2000-2023, MDText.com, Inc.

PMID: 29714937
