1. The Role of Exercise in Diabetes.

Zahalka SJ(1), Abushamat LA(2), Scalzo RL(3), Reusch JEB(4).

In: Feingold KR(5), Anawalt B(6), Blackman MR(7), Boyce A(8), Chrousos G(9), 
Corpas E(10), de Herder WW(11), Dhatariya K(12), Dungan K(13), Hofland J(14), 
Kalra S(15), Kaltsas G(16), Kapoor N(17), Koch C(18), Kopp P(19), Korbonits 
M(20), Kovacs CS(21), Kuohung W(22), Laferrère B(23), Levy M(24), McGee EA(25), 
McLachlan R(26), New M(27), Purnell J(28), Sahay R(29), Shah AS(30), Singer 
F(31), Sperling MA(32), Stratakis CA(33), Trence DL(34), Wilson DP(35), editors. 
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000–.
2023 Jan 6.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, University of Colorado, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, Rocky Mountain Regional VA, Aurora, Colorado.
(2)Section of Cardiovascular Research, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(3)Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, University of Colorado, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, Rocky Mountain Regional VA, Aurora, Colorado, Center 
for Women’s Health Research, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO.
(4)Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, University of Colorado, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, Rocky Mountain Regional VA, Aurora, Colorado, 
Ludeman Family Center for Women’s Health Research, University of Colorado, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO.
(5)Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San Francisco, CA
(6)Chief of Medicine at the University of Washington Medical Center and 
Professor and Vice Chair of the Department of Medicine, University of Washington
(7)Sr. Physician Scientist, Washington DC VA Medical Center; Professor of 
Medicine & Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University; Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University; and 
Professor of Medicine (Part-time), Johns Hopkins University
(8)Pediatric Endocrinologist and Associate Research Physician in the Skeletal 
Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health
(9)Professor of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism and Diabetes, First Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece
(10)M.D. Ph.D in Gerontology. Honorary Professor of Medicine, Universidad de 
Alcalá, Madrid. Consultant in Endocrinology, Hospital HLA Guadalajara (Spain).
(11)Professor of Endocrine Oncology, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(12)Consultant in Diabetes, Endocrinology and General Medicine, Norfolk and 
Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK.
(13)Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 
Ohio State University
(14)Consultant Endocrinologist, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(15)Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, 
Karnal, India
(16)Professor of General Medicine-Endocrinology, 1st Department of Propaedeutic 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
(17)Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(18)Professor, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 
Tennessee
(19)Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetology and Metabolism, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
(20)Professor of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Centre Lead for Endocrinology and 
Deputy Institute Director, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, England
(21)University Research Professor and Professor of Medicine (Endocrinology and 
Metabolism), Obstetrics & Gynecology, and BioMedical Sciences, at Memorial 
University of Newfoundland in St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada.
(22)Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology at Boston Medical 
Center and an Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Boston 
University School of Medicine
(23)Professor of Medicine, New York Nutrition Obesity Research Center, Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(24)Consultant endocrinologist at University Hospitals of Leicester and Honorary 
Associate Professor at Leicester University
(25)Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Vermont and 
Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 
Burlington, Vermont
(26)Director of Clinical Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia
(27)Professor of Pediatrics, Professor of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, and 
Chief of the Adrenal Steroid Disorders Program, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
(28)Professor of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and the Division of 
Endocrinology, and Associate Director, Bob and Charlee Moore Institute for 
Nutrition and Wellness, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
(29)Professor and Head of Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College 
and Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(30)Professor of Pediatrics, The University of Cincinnati, Department of 
Pediatrics and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Endocrinology, Cincinnati, OH, USA
(31)Director of the Endocrine/Bone Disease Program, Saint Johns Cancer Institute 
at Saint John’s Health Center, Santa Monica, CA; Clinical Professor of Medicine, 
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
(32)Professorial Lecturer, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Emeritus Professor and 
Chair, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh.
(33)CSO, ELPEN, Inc. & Director, Research Institute, Athens, Greece & Senior 
Investigator, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, FORTH (ITE), Heraklion, 
Greece. Emeritus Scientific Director & Senior Investigator, NICHD, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
(34)Professor of Medicine, Emeritus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
(35)Endowed Chair, Cardiovascular Health and Risk Prevention, Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX

Exercise is a key component to lifestyle therapy for prevention and treatment of 
type 2 diabetes (T2D). These recommendations are based on positive associations 
between physical activity and T2D prevention, treatment, and disease-associated 
morbidity and mortality. For type 1 diabetes (T1D), we have evidence to support 
that exercise can reduce diabetes associated complications. However, there are 
physiological and behavioral barriers to exercise that people with both T2D and 
T1D must overcome to achieve these benefits. Physiological barriers include 
diabetes-mediated impairment in functional exercise capacity, increased rates of 
perceived exertion with lower workloads, and decision making regarding glycemic 
management. There are additional social and psychological stressors including 
depression and reduced self-efficacy. Interestingly, there is variability in the 
response to exercise by sex, genetics, and environment, further complicating the 
expectations for individual benefit from physical activity. Defining optimal 
dose, duration, timing, and type of exercise is still uncertain for individual 
health benefits of physical activity. In this review, we will discuss the 
preventative value of exercise for T2D development, the therapeutic impact of 
exercise on diabetes metabolic and cardiovascular outcomes, the barriers to 
exercise including hypoglycemia, and the impact of sex and gender on 
cardiorespiratory fitness and adaptive training response in people with and 
without diabetes. There are still many unknowns regarding the diabetes-mediated 
impairment in cardiorespiratory fitness, the variability and individual response 
to exercise training, and the impact of sex and gender. However, there is no 
debate that exercise provides a health benefit for people with and at risk for 
diabetes. For complete coverage of all related areas of Endocrinology, please 
visit our on-line FREE web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

Copyright © 2000-2023, MDText.com, Inc.

PMID: 31751111
