1. Neuromodulation. 2023 Feb;26(2):364-373. doi: 10.1016/j.neurom.2022.01.015.
Epub  2022 Feb 26.

Additive Effect of Dopaminergic Medication on Gait Under Single and Dual-Tasking 
Is Greater Than of Deep Brain Stimulation in Advanced Parkinson Disease With 
Long-Duration Deep Brain Stimulation.

Langer A(1), Lucke-Paulig L(2), Gassner L(3), Krüger R(4), Weiss D(5), 
Gharabaghi A(6), Zach H(1), Maetzler W(7), Hobert MA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany; Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Geriatrics, Stuttgart 
General Hospital, Bad Cannstatt, Germany.
(3)Department of Sport Physiology, Institute of Sports Sciences, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne, 
Australia; HTA Austria - Austrian Institute for Health Technology Assessment 
GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany; Luxembourg Institute of Health, Strassen, Luxembourg; Luxembourg Centre 
for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; 
Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(5)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany.
(6)Institute for Neuromodulation and Neurotechnology, Department of Neurosurgery 
and Neurotechnology, University Hospital Tuebingen, University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(7)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany; Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, 
Campus Kiel, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(8)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany; Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, 
Campus Kiel, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany. Electronic 
address: Markus.Hobert@uksh.de.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with advanced Parkinson disease (PD) often experience 
problems with mobility, including walking under single- (ST) and dual-tasking 
(DT) conditions. The effects of deep brain stimulation in the subthalamic 
nucleus (DBS) versus dopaminergic medication (Med) on these conditions are not 
well investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used two ST and two DT-gait paradigms to evaluate the 
effect of DBS and dopaminergic medication on gait parameters in 14 PD patients 
(mean age 66 ± 8 years) under DBSOFF/MedON, DBSON/MedOFF, and DBSON/MedON 
conditions. They performed standardized 20-meter walks with convenient and fast 
speed. To test DT capabilities, they performed a checking-boxes and a 
subtraction task during fast-paced walking. Quantitative gait analysis was 
performed using a tri-axial accelerometer (Dynaport, McRoberts, The 
Netherlands). Dual-task costs (DTC) of gait parameters and secondary task 
performance were compared intraindividually between DBSOFF/MedON vs DBSON/MedON, 
and DBSON/MedOFF vs DBSON/MedON to estimate responsiveness.
RESULTS: Dopaminergic medication increased gait speed and cadence at convenient 
speed. It increased cadence and decreased number of steps at fast speed, and 
improved DTC of cadence during the checking boxes and DTC of cadence and number 
of steps during the subtraction tasks. DBS only improved DTC of cadence during 
the checking boxes and DTC of gait speed during the subtraction task.
CONCLUSION: Dopaminergic medication showed larger additional effects on temporal 
gait parameters under ST and DT conditions in advanced PD than DBS. These 
results, after confirmation in independent studies, should be considered in the 
medical management of advanced PD patients with gait and DT deficits.

Copyright © 2022 International Neuromodulation Society. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurom.2022.01.015
PMID: 35227581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
