1. Mod Rheumatol. 2023 Jan 3;33(1):36-45. doi: 10.1093/mr/roac019.

Non-drug and surgical treatment algorithm and recommendations for the 2020 
update of the Japan College of Rheumatology clinical practice guidelines for the 
management of rheumatoid arthritis-secondary publication.

Ito H(1)(2), Nishida K(3), Kojima T(4), Matsushita I(5), Kojima M(6), Hirata 
S(7), Kaneko Y(8), Kishimoto M(9), Kohno M(10), Mori M(11), Morinobu A(12), 
Murashima A(13), Seto Y(14), Sugihara T(11), Tanaka E(15), Nakayama T(16), 
Yamanaka H(17), Kawahito Y(10), Harigai M(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Okayama University Academic Field of 
Medicine, Density and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(5)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Frailty Research, Center for Gerontology and Social Science, 
National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(7)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Hiroshima University 
Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Kyorin University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Inflammation and Immunology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(11)Division of Rheumatology and Allergology, St. Marianna University School of 
Medicine, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(12)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(13)Center for Maternal-Fetal, Neonatal, and Reproductive Medicine/Japan Drug 
Information Institute in Pregnancy, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Rheumatology, Yachiyo Medical Center, Tokyo Women's Medical 
University School of Medicine, Yachiyo, Japan.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Tokyo Women's 
Medical University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Health Informatics, Kyoto University School of Public Health, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(17)Rheumatology, Sanno Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to update the Japan College of 
Rheumatology (JCR) clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) for the management of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and prepare an algorithm for non-drug and surgical 
treatments. This article is a digest version of the guidelines.
METHODS: The Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare's research group, 
in collaboration with the JCR, used the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation method to update the 2014 JCR CPG for RA. The 
consensus was formed by CPG panel members.
RESULTS: We raised 19 clinical questions regarding non-drug and surgical 
treatments for RA and developed recommendations. The treatments included 
exercise therapy; occupational therapy; joint injection of corticosteroids; and 
orthopaedic surgeries including cervical spine surgery, wrist and foot 
arthroplasty, ankle arthrodesis, and replacement arthroplasty of the shoulder, 
elbow, finger, hip, knee, and ankle. Recommendations regarding the risks of 
surgery and perioperative discontinuation of medications have also been 
developed. Based on these recommendations, we created an original algorithm for 
the non-drug and surgical treatment of RA.
CONCLUSIONS: These recommendations are expected to serve rheumatologists, health 
care professionals, and patients with RA as tools for shared decision-making to 
treat residual limb joint symptoms and functional impairment.

© Japan College of Rheumatology 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/mr/roac019
PMID: 35294030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
