1. Alzheimers Dement. 2023 Feb;19(2):532-548. doi: 10.1002/alz.12666. Epub 2022
Apr  29.

Longitudinal changes in cerebral blood flow and their relation with cognitive 
decline in patients with dementia: Current knowledge and future directions.

Weijs RWJ(1), Shkredova DA(1)(2), Brekelmans ACM(1), Thijssen DHJ(1)(3), 
Claassen JAHR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Heart, Lung, and Vascular Health, School of Health and Exercise 
Sciences, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna, British Columbia, 
Canada.
(3)Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Science, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, UK.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, Radboud UMC Alzheimer's Center, Donders Institute 
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.

The pathophysiology underlying cognitive decline is multifactorial, with 
increasing literature suggesting a role for cerebrovascular health. Cerebral 
blood flow (CBF) is an important element of cerebrovascular health, which raises 
questions regarding the relation between CBF and cognitive decline. 
Cross-sectional studies demonstrate lower CBF in patients with cognitive decline 
compared to healthy age-matched peers. Remarkably, longitudinal studies do not 
support a link between CBF reductions and cognitive decline. These studies, 
however, are often limited by small sample sizes and may therefore be 
underpowered to detect small effect sizes. Therefore, through a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies, we examined whether 
longitudinal changes in global CBF are related to cognitive decline in subjects 
with Alzheimer's disease, and qualitatively described findings on regional CBF. 
Considering the growing impact of dementia and the lack of treatment options, it 
is important to understand the role of CBF as a prognostic biomarker and/or 
treatment target in dementia.

© 2022 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12666
PMID: 35485906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
