1. Gerontology. 2023;69(2):212-226. doi: 10.1159/000524701. Epub 2022 Jun 10.

Changes in Psychological Determinants of Behavior Change after Individual versus 
Group-Based Lifestyle-integrated Fall Prevention: Results from the LiFE-is-LiFE 
Trial.

Labudek S(1), Fleig L(2), Jansen CP(3), Kramer-Gmeiner F(1), Nerz C(3), Clemson 
L(4), Klenk J(3)(5)(6), Becker C(3), Schwenk M(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Network Aging Research, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, MSB Medical School Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Gerontology and Geriatric Rehabilitation, 
Robert-Bosch-Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(5)Institute of Epidemiology and Medical Biometry, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.
(6)IB University of Health and Social Sciences, Study Centre Stuttgart, 
Stuttgart, Germany.
(7)Human Performance Research Centre, Department of Sport Science, University of 
Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The Lifestyle-integrated Functional Exercise (LiFE) intervention has 
been shown to promote physical activity in fall-prone older adults. However, the 
underlying mechanisms of how LiFE functions remain unclear. This study compares 
the effects of the individual and group-based LiFE formats on psychological 
determinants of behavior change derived from the health action process approach, 
habit formation theory, and self-determination theory.
METHODS: Secondary analysis on basis of the randomized, non-inferiority 
LiFE-is-LiFE trial were performed. Questionnaire data on psychological 
determinants were obtained from older adults (M = 78.8 years, range 70-95) who 
took part in either the individual (n = 156) or the group-based (n = 153) LiFE 
intervention. Measurement points varied from three to six times, and from 
baseline (T1) up to a 12-month follow-up (T6). A generalized linear mixed model 
was specified for each determinant.
RESULTS: Both LiFE and gLiFE participants reported lower levels of motivational 
determinants at T6. LiFE participants showed significantly higher values of 
action planning and coping planning at T6. Participants in both formats showed 
increased levels of action control at T6, whereas participants' habit strength 
decreased post-intervention but then stabilized over time. LiFE participants 
showed higher levels of autonomy, competence, and relatedness throughout the 
study, but levels of intrinsic motivation did not differ between formats and 
from T1 to T6.
CONCLUSION: In both formats, but especially in the individual LiFE, the behavior 
change techniques used affected volitional rather than motivational or general 
determinants of behavior change. Habit strength as an important indicator of the 
sustainability of the LiFE exercises stabilized over time, indicating that 
participants, at least partly, sustained their formed habits long-term.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000524701
PMID: 35691288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
