1. Health Promot J Austr. 2023 Feb;34(1):41-47. doi: 10.1002/hpja.630. Epub 2022 
Jun 30.

Exploring the perspectives of clinicians on solutions to tackling physical 
inactivity and sedentary behaviour in older hospital patients.

Jasper U(1)(2), Visvanathan R(1)(2)(3), Dollard J(1)(2), Yu S(1)(2)(3), Jadczak 
AD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Adelaide Geriatrics Training and Research with Aged Care (GTRAC) Centre, 
Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(2)Basil Hetzel Institute for Translational Health Research, Central Adelaide 
Local Health Network, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(3)Aged & Extended Care Services, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital & Basil Hetzel 
Institute for Translational Health Research, Central Adelaide Local Health 
Network, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Despite growing research on sedentary behaviour and physical activity 
among hospitalised older people, there is little evidence of effective 
intervention strategies. This study sought input from clinical staff from 
various health professions on strategies to increase physical activity and 
reduce sedentariness for hospitalised older people.
METHODS: A 60-minute focus group discussion involving two physiotherapists, two 
occupational therapists, one doctor, one nurse and one social worker was 
conducted. Participants were recruited from a subacute geriatric ward and an 
acute orthopaedic ward with an orthogeriatric service at a general hospital. 
Data were thematically analysed.
RESULTS: Six strategies to reduce sedentary behaviour and increase physical 
activity were identified: clear and positive communication for patients and 
family/carers; educating patients and family/carers; involving family/carers and 
volunteers; setting physical activity goals; utilising group activities and 
activities of daily living (ADL); and making the hospital environment 
activity-friendly.
CONCLUSIONS: This research has revealed novel strategies to increase physical 
activity and reduce sedentary behaviour in hospital. The next step is to design 
interventions for testing.

© 2022 The Authors. Health Promotion Journal of Australia published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian Health Promotion 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/hpja.630
PMCID: PMC10084344
PMID: 35714042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Visvanathan whilst the Head of Unit of 
the geriatrics service at this general hospital which operates the GEMU and 
delivers the orthogeriatrics service, played no role in recruiting participants 
to this research or interviewing participants.
