1. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2023 Feb;36(1):62-74. doi: 10.1111/jhn.13052. Epub 2022 Jul
24.

Children's food choices are highly dependent on patterns of parenting practices 
and food availability at home in families at high risk for type 2 diabetes in 
Europe: Cross-sectional results from the Feel4Diabetes study.

Zannidi D(1), Karatzi K(2), Karaglani E(1), Liatis S(3), Cardon G(4), Iotova 
V(5), Tsochev K(5), Chakarova N(6), Moreno LA(7)(8)(9), Flores-Barrantes P(7), 
Radó S(10), Rurik I(10), Lindström J(11), Makrilakis K(3), Manios Y(1)(12); 
Feel4Diabetes Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Harokopio University of Athens, 
Kallithea, Athens, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Dietetics and Quality of Life, Department of Food Science & 
Human Nutrition, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, Agricultural 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(3)National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, First 
Department of Propaedeutic Medicine, Laiko General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Movement and Sports Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Deptarture of Paediatrics, Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria.
(6)Clinical Center of Endocrinology and Gerontology, Medical University of 
Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(7)Growth, Exercise, Nutrition and Development (GENUD) Research Group, 
University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
(8)Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón (IA2), Instituto De Investigación 
Sanitaria Aragón (IIS Aragón), Zaragoza, Spain.
(9)CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Department of Family and Occupational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(11)Department of Public Health and Welfare, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(12)Institute of Agri-food and Life Sciences, Hellenic Mediterranean University 
Research Centre, Heraklion, Greece (Agro-Health).

BACKGROUND: Food parenting practices, behaviours and food availability at home 
are associated with children's food choices; however, these associations have 
been mainly studied for each parenting practice separately and focused mostly on 
healthy populations. The aim of the study was to identify patterns of parenting 
practices (including data regarding food availability at home, food and physical 
activity-related behaviours and rewards) and to investigate their 
cross-sectional associations with children's food choices in families at high 
risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
METHODS: Data of parents and children (n = 2278), from the Feel4Diabetes study 
conducted in six European countries, were collected using validated 
questionnaires. The data analysed included children's food choices, food 
availability at home and food and physical activity-related parenting practices. 
Four patterns of parenting practices were identified using principal component 
analysis, and associations between those components and children's food choices 
were assessed using adjusted, individual linear regressions.
RESULTS: Parenting patterns focusing on unhealthy habits, such as allowing 
unhealthy snacks and unlimited screen time, providing higher availability of 
unhealthy foods at home, rewarding with snacks and screen time, were positively 
associated with children's unhealthy food choices (consumption of savoury/sweet 
snacks, fizzy drinks, etc.). The parenting patterns providing fruit/vegetables 
at home, consuming fruit, and being physically active with the child were 
positively associated with children's healthier food choices (consumption of 
fruit, vegetables, whole grain cereals, etc.).
CONCLUSIONS: Public health initiatives should focus on high-risk families for 
T2D, assisting them to adopt appropriate parenting practices and behaviours to 
promote healthier food choices for children.

© 2022 The British Dietetic Association Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jhn.13052
PMID: 35762034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
