1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Mar 1;78(3):545-553. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glac149.

Myelin and Physical Activity in Older Adults With Cerebral Small Vessel Disease 
and Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Boa Sorte Silva NC(1)(2)(3), Dao E(1)(2)(4)(5), Liang Hsu C(2)(6), Tam RC(1)(7), 
Lam K(8), Alkeridy W(1)(9)(10), Laule C(4)(5)(11)(12), Vavasour IM(4)(5), Stein 
RG(1)(2)(3), Liu-Ambrose T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Centre for Hip Health and Mobility, Vancouver Coastal Health Research 
Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Hinda and Arthur Marcus Institute for Aging Research, Hebrew SeniorLife, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)School of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Science and Faculty of 
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(9)Department of Medicine, King Saud University, College of Medicine, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(11)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(12)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Myelin loss is a feature of cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD). 
Although physical activity levels may exert protective effects over cSVD 
pathology, its specific relationship with myelin content in people living with 
the cSVD is unknown. Thus, we investigated whether physical activity levels are 
associated with myelin in community-dwelling older adults with cSVD and mild 
cognitive impairment.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data from 102 individuals with cSVD and mild cognitive 
impairment were analyzed (mean age [SD] = 74.7 years [5.5], 63.7% female). 
Myelin was measured using a magnetic resonance gradient and spin echo sequence. 
Physical activity was estimated using the Physical Activity Scale for the 
Elderly. Hierarchical regression models adjusting for total intracranial volume, 
age, sex, body mass index, and education were conducted to determine the 
associations between myelin content and physical activity. Significant models 
were further adjusted for white matter hyperintensity volume.
RESULTS: In adjusted models, greater physical activity was linked to higher 
myelin content in the whole-brain white matter (R2change = .04, p = .048). 
Greater physical activity was also associated with myelin content in the 
sagittal stratum (R2change = .08, p = .004), anterior corona radiata (R2change = 
.04, p = .049), and genu of the corpus callosum (R2change = .05, p = .018). 
Adjusting for white matter hyperintensity volume did not change any of these 
associations.
CONCLUSIONS: Physical activity may be a strategy to maintain myelin in older 
adults with cSVD and mild cognitive impairment. Future randomized controlled 
trials of exercise are needed to determine whether exercise increases myelin 
content.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glac149
PMID: 35876839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
