1. Mod Rheumatol. 2023 Apr 13;33(3):435-440. doi: 10.1093/mr/roac095.

Management of sarcopenia in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Torii M(1), Itaya T(2), Minamino H(3), Katsushima M(4), Fujita Y(3), Tanaka 
H(5), Oshima Y(5), Watanabe R(6)(7), Ito H(6)(8), Arai H(9), Hashimoto M(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Healthcare Epidemiology, Graduate School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Rehabilitation Unit, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Department of Advanced Medicine for Rheumatic Diseases, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(7)Department of Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
Metropolitan University, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Okayama, 
Japan.
(9)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Aichi, Japan.

This review summarizes the evidence for the management of sarcopenia in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in terms of drugs, exercise, and nutrition. 
Sarcopenia is a decrease in skeletal muscle mass and muscle strength or physical 
function. The prevalence of sarcopenia in patients with RA is higher than that 
in the general population. The treatment and management of sarcopenia in 
patients with RA are clinically important for long-term prognosis. One of the 
mechanisms of muscle metabolism is the pro-inflammatory cytokine pathway, which 
involves tumour necrosis factor α and interleukin-6, and is a common pathway in 
the pathogenesis of RA. Thus, tumour necrosis factor α and interleukin-6 
inhibitors may play a potential role in controlling sarcopenia. In exercise 
therapy, a combination of moderate resistance and aerobic exercise may be 
effective in improving muscle strength, muscle mass, and physical function; 
however, intense exercise may exacerbate the inflammatory response in RA. 
Regarding nutrition, protein intake is generally considered beneficial, but 
other nutrients such as vitamin D and carotenoids have also been studied. 
Overall, there remains a lack of concrete evidence on sarcopenia treatment and 
management in patients with RA from any perspective; more longitudinal and 
intervention studies are needed in the future.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japan 
College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1093/mr/roac095
PMID: 35986513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
