1. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2023 Jan 28;78(1):167-178. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/gbac127.

The Retirement-Health Puzzle: A Sigh of Relief at Retirement?

Okamoto S(1)(2), Kobayashi E(1), Komamura K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Team for Social Participation and Community Health, Tokyo 
Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Institute for Global Health Policy Research, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Financial Gerontology, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Economics, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: While the health effects of retirement have been well studied, 
existing findings remain inconclusive, and the mechanisms underlying the linkage 
between retirement and health are unclear. Thus, this study aimed to evaluate 
the effects of retirement on health and its potential mediators.
METHODS: Using a national household survey conducted annually from 2004 to 2019 
in Japan (the Japan Household Panel Survey), we evaluated the effects of 
retirement among Japanese men aged 50 or older on their health, in addition to 
other outcomes that could be attributed to health changes associated with 
retirement (i.e., health behaviors, psychological well-being, time use for 
unpaid activities, and leisure activities). As outcomes are not measured every 
year, we analyzed 5,794-10,682 person-year observations for 975-1,469 unique 
individuals. To address the potential endogeneity of retirement, we adopted an 
instrumental variable fixed-effects approach based on policy changes in 
eligibility ages for employee pensions.
RESULTS: We found that retirement improved psychological well-being, exercise 
habits, and time spent on unpaid work. The psychological benefits of retirement 
were no longer observed for longer durations after retirement, whereas healthy 
habits and unpaid activities continued. Moreover, health-related improvements 
after retirement occurred mostly in the higher-income group.
DISCUSSION: Enhancement in personal quality of life owing to increased leisure 
time and stress reduction from work in addition to lifestyle changes may be key 
to understanding the health benefits of retirement. Considering the mechanisms 
behind retirement-health relationships and potential heterogeneous effects is 
essential for healthy postretirement lives when increasing the retirement age.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbac127
PMID: 36044284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
