1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Jul 8;78(7):1292-1299. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glac194.

The Association Between Midlife Leisure-Time Physical Activity and Hearing Loss 
in Late Life in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study.

Martinez-Amezcua P(1), Garcia Morales E(2)(3), Gabriel KP(4), Dooley EE(4), 
Hornikel B(4), Coresh J(2)(5), Lin FR(2)(3), Pankow JS(6), Sharrett AR(2)(5), 
Schrack JA(2), Sullivan KJ(7), Reed N(2)(3), Deal JA(2)(3), Palta P(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Columbia University 
Irving Medical Campus, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Cochlear Center for Hearing and Public Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School 
of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(5)Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Division of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi, Medical Center, Jackson, 
Mississippi, USA.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hearing loss is highly prevalent in older ages and has several 
health consequences. Some cardiovascular risk factors are associated with worse 
hearing at older ages. Still, the role of midlife leisure-time physical activity 
(PA) as a risk factor for hearing loss is yet to be investigated.
METHODS: Among 3 198 participants of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
study, we investigated the associations of midlife and change from mid- to 
late-life PA (assessed via modified Baecke questionnaire) with hearing loss 
(audiometric battery [worse-ear pure-tone average, and speech-in-noise test]) at 
older ages. We used regression analyses, adjusted for demographics, medical 
conditions, and noise exposure, to estimate differences in hearing between those 
who met and did not meet PA recommendations at midlife and at late life.
RESULTS: A total of 1 386 (43.3%) participants met PA recommendations at 
midlife. These participants, compared to those who did not meet recommendations, 
had lower (better) pure-tone average by 1.51 (0.46, 2.55) decibels, identified 
0.37 (0.01, 0.74) more words (better score) in the speech-in-noise test, and had 
a lower relative risk of having hearing loss at older ages (eg, relative risk 
ratio for severe hearing loss vs normal hearing = 0.70 [0.52, 0.95]). Similarly, 
those who persistently met PA recommendations from mid- to late life had, 
compared with those who did not, a better hearing at older ages.
CONCLUSIONS: Meeting PA public health recommendations in midlife and mid- to 
late life was associated with better hearing at older ages and reduced risk of 
hearing loss. Promoting adequate levels of PA may be an essential component of 
hearing care.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glac194
PMCID: PMC10329230
PMID: 36124822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.R.L. and J.A.S. serve on the editorial board 
of Journals of Gerontology: Medical Sciences (JGMS). N.R. is on the Advisory 
board of Neosensory. F.R.L. is consultant to frequency therapeutics, speaker 
honoraria from Caption Call, and director of the Cochlear Center, a research 
center funded in part by a philanthropic gift from Cochlear Ltd to the Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. The other authors declare no 
conflict.
