1. J Burn Care Res. 2023 Jan 5;44(1):140-145. doi: 10.1093/jbcr/irac163.

Effects of Inspiratory Muscle Training on Clinical Predictors of Respiratory 
Muscle Strength and Lung Function in Burned Patients with Inhalation Injury.

El-Sayed Attalla AF(1), Ahmed KT(2), Abd El Monem M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy for Surgery, Faculty of Physical Therapy, 
Cairo University, Egypt.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy for Cardiopulmonary Disorders and Geriatrics, 
Faculty of Physical Therapy, Misr University for Science and Technology, Giza, 
Egypt.

Chronic airway illness is a well-documented inhalation injury side effect. Many 
pulmonary function impairments persisted for several months after lung 
parenchymal injury. Thus, the purpose of this study was to investigate the 
effects of inspiratory muscle training on respiratory muscle strength and 
pulmonary function (PFT) in patients who had suffered an inhalation injury. This 
study included male patients with inhalation injuries aged 20-35 years. Patients 
were chosen at random and assigned to an exercise group, which received 
inspiratory muscle training and routine chest physiotherapy, including early 
ambulation, coughing, and deep breathing, three times weekly for 4 weeks, and 
the control group, which only received routine chest physiotherapy. All 
participants were assessed for PFT and respiratory muscle strength at enrollment 
and the end of the study. The statistical analysis for outcome variables between 
both groups revealed no significant differences before treatment (P > .05) of 
forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second 
(FEV1), maximal inspiratory pressure, and maximal expiratory pressure. According 
to the findings of this study, including IMT as part of a physical therapy 
program led to significant gains (P ˂ .05) in FVC and FEV1. However, after 
treatment, there was not a substantial difference found in either the MIP or the 
MEP between the groups. The exercise group performed better in terms of FVC, 
FEV1, MIP, and MEP after receiving treatment, according to these significant and 
non-significant differences.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Burn Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jbcr/irac163
PMID: 36309913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
