1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2023 Feb;14(1):142-156. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.13115.
 Epub 2022 Nov 9.

Consensus guidelines for sarcopenia prevention, diagnosis and management in 
Australia and New Zealand.

Zanker J(1)(2), Sim M(3)(4), Anderson K(5)(6), Balogun S(7)(8), Brennan-Olsen 
SL(1)(2)(9)(10), Dent E(11), Duque G(1)(2)(12), Girgis CM(13)(14), Grossmann 
M(15), Hayes A(1)(16), Henwood T(17), Hirani V(18), Inderjeeth C(19), Iuliano 
S(1)(2), Keogh J(20)(21)(22)(23), Lewis JR(3)(4)(24), Lynch GS(25), Pasco 
JA(2)(26), Phu S(2)(27), Reijnierse EM(28)(29)(30), Russell N(15), Vlietstra 
L(31), Visvanathan R(32)(33), Walker T(34), Waters DL(31), Yu S(32)(33), Maier 
AB(28)(35)(36)(37), Daly RM(38), Scott D(38)(39).

Author information:
(1)Australian Institute for Musculoskeletal Science (AIMSS), The University of 
Melbourne and Western Health, St. Albans, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine - Western Health, The University of Melbourne, St. 
Albans, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Nutrition & Health Innovation Research Institute, School of Medical and 
Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(5)Institute for Health Transformation - Determinants of Health, Faculty of 
Health, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria, Australia.
(6)School of Health and Social Development, Faculty of Health, Deakin 
University, Burwood, Victoria, Australia.
(7)College of Health and Medicine, Australian National University, Canberra, 
Australian Capital Territory, Australia.
(8)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, 
Tasmania, Australia.
(9)School of Health and Social Development, Faculty of Health, Deakin 
University, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(10)Institute for Health Transformation, Deakin University, Geelong, Victoria, 
Australia.
(11)Torrens University Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(12)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Department of 
Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(13)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(14)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(15)Department of Medicine - Austin Health, Department of Endocrinology, The 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(16)Institute for Health and Sport (IHeS), Victoria University, Footscray, 
Victoria, Australia.
(17)Human Movement and Nutritional Science, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(18)Nutrition and Dietetics Group, School of Life and Environmental Sciences 
Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia.
(19)North Metropolitan Health Service & University of Western Australia, Perth, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(20)Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine, Bond University, Gold Coast, 
Queensland, Australia.
(21)Human Potential Centre, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(22)Cluster for Health Improvement, Faculty of Science, Health, Education and 
Engineering, University of the Sunshine Coast, Sunshine Coast, Queensland, 
Australia.
(23)Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, 
Manipal, India.
(24)Centre for Kidney Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead School of Public 
Health, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(25)Centre for Muscle Research, Department of Anatomy and Physiology, School of 
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(26)IMPACT-Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, 
Barwon Health, Deakin University, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(27)Falls, Balance, and Injury Research Centre, Neuroscience Research Australia 
(NeuRA), Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(28)Department of Medicine and Aged Care, @AgeMelbourne, The Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(29)Amsterdam UMC location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Rehabilitation 
Medicine, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(30)Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Ageing & Vitality, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(31)School of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(32)Adelaide Geriatrics Training and Research with Aged Care (GTRAC) Centre, 
School of Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(33)Aged & Extended Care Services, Acute and Urgent Care, The Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Central Adelaide Local Health Network, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(34)Institute for Health Transformation, Global Obesity Centre, Deakin 
University, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(35)Healthy Longevity Translational Research Program, Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(36)Centre for Healthy Longevity, @AgeSingapore, National University Health 
System, Singapore.
(37)Department of Human Movement Sciences, @AgeAmsterdam, Faculty of Behavioural 
and Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(38)Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition, Deakin University, Burwood, 
Victoria, Australia.
(39)Department of Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health, Monash 
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Sarcopenia is an age-associated skeletal muscle condition 
characterized by low muscle mass, strength, and physical performance. There is 
no international consensus on a sarcopenia definition and no contemporaneous 
clinical and research guidelines specific to Australia and New Zealand. The 
Australian and New Zealand Society for Sarcopenia and Frailty Research (ANZSSFR) 
Sarcopenia Diagnosis and Management Task Force aimed to develop consensus 
guidelines for sarcopenia prevention, assessment, management and research, 
informed by evidence, consumer opinion, and expert consensus, for use by health 
professionals and researchers in Australia and New Zealand.
METHODS: A four-phase modified Delphi process involving topic experts and 
informed by consumers, was undertaken between July 2020 and August 2021. Phase 1 
involved a structured meeting of 29 Task Force members and a systematic 
literature search from which the Phase 2 online survey was developed 
(Qualtrics). Topic experts responded to 18 statements, using 11-point Likert 
scales with agreement threshold set a priori at >80%, and five multiple-choice 
questions. Statements with moderate agreement (70%-80%) were revised and 
re-introduced in Phase 3, and statements with low agreement (<70%) were 
rejected. In Phase 3, topic experts responded to six revised statements and 
three additional questions, incorporating results from a parallel Consumer 
Expert Delphi study. Phase 4 involved finalization of consensus statements.
RESULTS: Topic experts from Australia (n = 62, 92.5%) and New Zealand (n = 5, 
7.5%) with a mean ± SD age of 45.7 ± 11.8 years participated in Phase 2; 38 
(56.7%) were women, 38 (56.7%) were health professionals and 27 (40.3%) were 
researchers/academics. In Phase 2, 15 of 18 (83.3%) statements on sarcopenia 
prevention, screening, assessment, management and future research were accepted 
with strong agreement. The strongest agreement related to encouraging a healthy 
lifestyle (100%) and offering tailored resistance training to people with 
sarcopenia (92.5%). Forty-seven experts participated in Phase 3; 5/6 (83.3%) 
revised statements on prevention, assessment and management were accepted with 
strong agreement. A majority of experts (87.9%) preferred the revised European 
Working Group for Sarcopenia in Older Persons (EWGSOP2) definition. Seventeen 
statements with strong agreement (>80%) were confirmed by the Task Force in 
Phase 4.
CONCLUSIONS: The ANZSSFR Task Force present 17 sarcopenia management and 
research recommendations for use by health professionals and researchers which 
includes the recommendation to adopt the EWGSOP2 sarcopenia definition in 
Australia and New Zealand. This rigorous Delphi process that combined evidence, 
consumer expert opinion and topic expert consensus can inform similar 
initiatives in countries/regions lacking consensus on sarcopenia.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting 
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.13115
PMCID: PMC9891980
PMID: 36349684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ABM has received speaker and consulting fees 
from Abbott, Nutricia, AstraZeneca, Novartis. GD is a member of the Scientific 
Advisory Board of TSI, Abbott and Amgen and has received speaker/consulting fees 
from Amgen, Abbott and TSI. MG has received research funding from Bayer Pharma, 
Novartis, Weight Watchers, Lilly, Otsuka and speaker's honoraria from Bayer 
Pharma, Besins Healthcare, and Amgen. RMD reports a grant form Fonterra 
Co‐operative Group Ltd, honoraria for presentations from Abbott Australia and 
Nutricia Research and to serve as a member of an expert advisory committee. RV 
has previously received education and honorarium from the following Abbott, 
Nestle and Nutricia. SI has received speaker/consulting fees from Abbott, UK 
Dairy Council, European Milk Forum, Nestle Health Science and the Israel Milk 
Board.
